[GEP-28] `ProjectGroup`s and `SeedBinding`s (#9991)
gardener/gardener: docs/proposals/27-project-group.md

---
title: Project Groups
gep-number: 27
creation-date: 2024-02-25
status: implementable
authors:
- "@tobschli"
- "@oliver-goetz"
reviewers:
- "@rfranzke"
- "@ScheererJ"
---

# GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds

## Table of Contents

- [GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds](#gep-27-project-groups-to-enable-private-seeds)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
      - [ProjectGroup](#projectgroup)
      - [SeedBinding](#seedbinding)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Implementation without ProjectGroup](#implementation-without-projectgroup)
    - [Resource sharing via hierarchical namespaces](#resource-sharing-via-hierarchical-namespaces)
    - [Exclusively leveraging existing Taints and Tolerations](#exclusively-leveraging-existing-taints-and-tolerations)

## Summary

## Motivation

Currently, all users of Gardener share all available seeds which each other. 

> As there is an interest to conveniently have the ability to schedule shoots on seeds with the ensurement that no other user groups will have shoot control planes on this seed, a new system or functionality needs to be introduced to systematically enable such a scenario.

Reviewer: Is `ensurement` a valid English word? Just asking for a non-native speaker.

Author: As it seems, it is not :D, removed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

> As there is an interest to conveniently have the ability to schedule shoots on seeds with the ensurement that no other user groups will have shoot control planes on this seed, a new system or functionality needs to be introduced to systematically enable such a scenario.

Reviewer: Let's split this up to make it more readable.

Author: split up in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

### Goals

> The overarching goal of this GEP is to lay some foundational work to enable homogeneous sovereign cloud scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The overarching goal of this GEP is to lay the foundational work to enable homogeneous sovereign cloud scenarios.
```

Author: fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

- Enable projects to use some seeds exclusively by adapting the shoot scheduling ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding))
- Share those, so called, seed bindings to different Projects that logically belong together in a concept called [`ProjectGroup`s](#projectgroup)
- Introduce new role for project group administrators

### Non-Goals

- Let users exclusively bind seeds on their own
## Proposal

#### ProjectGroup

> For that, a ProjectGroup API will be introduced that abstracts certain information over one or more projects. With this, it will become possible to homogeneously share resources between projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ProjectGroup API will be introduced that abstracts certain information over one or more projects. With this, it will become possible to homogeneously share resources between projects.
```

Author: fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

Such a ProjectGroup manifest looks like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: ProjectGroup
metadata:
  name: group1
spec:

>   namespace: group1-projectgroup

Reviewer: Does this namespace reference a `Project` namespace? Those usually have the the name `garden-project`.

Reviewer: If it indeed is a separate namespace should we not also introduce a default convention with regards to the naming, e.g. `gardenprojectgroup-<name>`? Unfortunately, `garden-` is already used for the project prefix so that `garden-project-group-<name>` is not possible.
WDYT?

Author: Yeah, sorry for the ambiguous phrasing.
I think the convention of `gardenprojectgroup-<name>` is good :)

  projects:
    - Project1
    - Project2
```

The main idea behind `ProjectGroup`s is that they, like projects, have an own namespace.
Every resource that is shareable (at first only `SeedBinding`s), which is in this namespace, will be shared to all `Project`s in this ProjectGroup.

> This sharing mechanism will be achieved by copying the objects from the project group namespace to the namespaces of the projects that belong to the project group.

Reviewer: Why copy instead of referencing?
How should copying be achieved?
What happens when something is changed in the project group namespace?
How fast should changes become effective in the project namespaces?

Author: In my opinion, copying is better than referencing, as this would require another type of resource (SeedBindingReference or SeedBindingBinding) and could confuse the user. But I might also be very wrong about that. What do you think?

Reviewer: Replication has some costs associated with it, e.g. additional runtime and storage costs. In addition to that, it increases complexity as project members might be tempted to change the copy instead of the source object.
We copy a lot of resources in the Gardener space, but references are also used. Therefore, both is possible.
I am interested if the trade-offs were considered, why we chose the way it is and how we want to address the short-comings of the approach.

> In the future, more objects can be copied like this or in a similar way with e.g. filtering to allow the sharing of secrets within a project group.

Reviewer: Please reword. I do not understand the sentence. What has filtering to do with this?

Author: The example was indeed far fetched / not well thought out. fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

> It will not be possible to add any arbitrary project to a project group. Only certain people should be allowed to add projects to a project group.

Reviewer: The second sentence contradicts the first one as it clearly states that someone could add projects to project groups.
Maybe just motivate that this is a sensitive operation. Therefore, role-based access control is required, which results in the addition of the project group admin role.

Author: I added the motivation that it is a sensitive operation in the `##### Permissions` part of the concept

> For this, a new role will be introduced in project groups, that will allow them to add projects, in which they are admin in, to the project group.

Reviewer: What does `will be introduced in project groups` mean? Will the admin be part of the `ProjectGroup` resource? If so, it should be included in the example above. In case it is "just" an ordinary kubernetes role please state this clearly.

Reviewer: Who will be able to create a `ProjectGroup`? Everybody or just any `Project` admins?

Author: Totally forgot to include the `ProjectGroup` members in the example, sorry.
Everyone should be able to create `ProjectGroup`s, and `SeedBindings`.

Only `SeedBinding`s with `.taintSeed: true` shall be creatable by Gardener operators

> Furthermore will it not be possible to add projects to a project group which do not exist.

Reviewer: Please fix the sentence.

Author: I hope I could clarify it in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

> Furthermore will it not be possible to add projects to a project group which do not exist.

Reviewer: What does this mean if I want to delete a `Project`, which is referenced by a `ProjectGroup`?

Author: The `ProjectGroup` controller should remove the Project from it

> The `.spec.namespace` field will behave equally as the project `.spec.namespace` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.spec.namespace` field in `ProjectGroup` will behave equally as the `Project` `.spec.namespace` field.
```

Author: fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

#### SeedBinding

> To enable the functionality of having exclusive or "private" seeds, a mechanism will be introduced that makes it possible to schedule shoots to specific seeds exclusively to one or more `Project`s.

Reviewer: Please reword. The end of the sentence makes it hard to understand.

Author: hopefully clarified in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

Seed bindings will be considered during the scheduling of a shoot, in a way that if a shoot belongs to a project with a seed binding, a seed that is targeted by the seed binding will be selected for scheduling.

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: SeedBinding
metadata:

>   name: project1-privateseed-aws-1

Reviewer: If `SeedBinding` is a namespaced resource why do you prefix the name with the project group name?

Author: fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

>   name: project1-privateseed-aws-1

Reviewer: Please do not use a specific infrastructure name.

Author: fixed in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2)

  namespace: project1-projectgroup
spec:
  taintSeed: false
  seedRef: project1-aws-ha1
  seedSelector:
    region: eu-west1

```

> If `.spec.taintSeed` is set to `true`, the specified seed(s) will be tainted, so that no other projects outside the project group can schedule shoots on them.

Reviewer: How is this supposed to work? What happens if two `SeedBinding` in different namespaces reference the same seed, but have both `.spec.taintSeed: true`?

Author: An error should be thrown in that case, as it should not be allowed by two different user groups to exclusively bind the same seed

Such tainting bindings will only be allowed to be created by Gardener operators, so that not any arbitrary user can exclusively bind seeds.

Seed bindings will only work in either project or project group namespaces.

As mentioned in [ProjectGroup](#projectgroup), when a seed binding is present in a project group namespace, it will be copied to the respective project namespace.

It will also be possible to allow seed bindings to be in a project namespace, in which it becomes available for a singular project.

The `.spec.seedRef` field specifies which Seed is bound to the project group / project.

Alternatively to such a specific seed, it will be possible to select one or more seeds by a label selector defined in `.spec.seedSelector`.

> Either `.spec.seedRef` and `.spec.seedSelector` will only be usable exclusively.

Reviewer: Do we really want a direct seed reference? The seed selector can be used to express the same thing and it allows to transparently scale in case more than one seed is required.

What is the benefit of having a direct seed reference and how should the scale-up migration work?

Author: Yeah, you are totally right about that :D
I removed the direct seed reference

## Alternatives

> ### Implementation without ProjectGroup

Reviewer: From my point of view, it is not clear in this document why a `ProjectGroup` is required apart from adding convenience when multiple projects should use the same `SeedBinding`. The same thing could be achieved if the corresponding `SeedBinding` is manually created in all required project namespaces.
Therefore, an approach without `ProjectGroup` seems feasible albeit less convenient.

Author: You are right. `ProjectGroup`s only adds the convenience of sharing `SeedBinding`s right now. But this can already remove a bit of load of Gardener operators, when users want to create new groups with the same settings as their other ones by putting them in the same project group

> Alternatively to introducing a new concept that spans above the hierarchy of projects, a mechanism could be introduced that lies on the level of projects itself, like sharing resources from one project to another.

Reviewer: Why is resource sharing a precondition? This is not obvious or has not been motivated in the document so far.

Author: Hopefully the new motivation clarifies that now

A downside of this could be that in actual use, a singular project could be used as a kind of "template" from which related projects get the relevant resources or information to schedule shoots on a private seed. As a result, this template project would have the same function as a project group, but from an architectual point of view, it would not be so clear that it is just that.

Therefore this concept is not really feasible.

### Resource sharing via hierarchical namespaces

The [Hierarchical Namespace Controller](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/hierarchical-namespaces?tab=readme-ov-file) would allow to share the proposed `SeedBinding`s natively. Even though the repository still received commits fairly recently, there is no general availability yet and the latest [release]((https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/hierarchical-namespaces/releases/tag/v1.1.0)) is quite old.

In addition to that, this new dependency would require reasonable additional effort to implement into the Gardener project, so intuitively it does not seem reasonable to use this controller in this context.

### Exclusively leveraging existing Taints and Tolerations

> It could be possible to completely rely on the existing tainting functionality of seeds and tolerations of shoots, but a problem arises, when two projects bind the same seed. This could be the case, when a user group wants to ensure e.g. that their control plane lands on a seed in a specific country. This would mean a taint for this project would be set. As all taints need to be tolerated by the shoot, a scenario like this would not be possible.

Reviewer: As far as I understand, the main problem would be coordination among the taints/tolerations to be used by multiple projects. This is not clear from this paragraph. Please clarify.

Author: I included an example now in [505e4e5](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9991/commits/505e4e5acf430ea272afda4ba4d162d7de8c98b2) that only relying on the taints and tolerations feature makes it hard to manage

---
title: Project Groups
gep-number: 27
creation-date: 2024-02-25
status: implementable
authors:
- "@tobschli"
- "@oliver-goetz"
reviewers:
---

# GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds

## Table of Contents

- [GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds](#gep-27-project-groups-to-enable-private-seeds)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
      - [ProjectGroup](#projectgroup)
        - [Permissions](#permissions)
      - [SeedBinding](#seedbinding)
        - [Permissions](#permissions-1)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Implementation without ProjectGroup](#implementation-without-projectgroup)
    - [Resource sharing via hierarchical namespaces](#resource-sharing-via-hierarchical-namespaces)
    - [Exclusively leveraging existing Taints and Tolerations](#exclusively-leveraging-existing-taints-and-tolerations)

## Summary

## Motivation

Due to local legal regulations, two use cases which define location requirements for shoot control planes have become increasingly relevant, demanding a defined system or method.

> In the first use case, control planes need to be scheduled to seeds, which are in certain geographical locations.

Reviewer: Is this the requirement or the implicit implementation detail? I would argue that the requirement is rather to run a workload completely within some, e.g. geo-political, boundary.
In the context of Gardener this relates to having all running parts of a shoot cluster within that boundary. For the data plane of a shoot cluster this can already be defined via the `region`, but for the control plane this problem was not addressed, yet.
In other words, I would prefer to expand this a bit so that it becomes clear why this is needed.

> The second use case has the same requirement as the first, but in addition to that, no other shoot control planes of other user groups are allowed to be scheduled on the same seed. A seed that is exclusively usable by one user group will be called a "private seed" in this context.

Reviewer: Please add why is needed. What are some example reasons why someone would want a private seed?

Although already technically possible, there is currently no fully defined method for fulfilling these use cases.

At the moment, [the second use case is enabled](https://gardener.cloud/docs/guides/security-and-compliance/regional-restrictions/) by Gardener operators manually tainting seeds and allowing projects of certain projects to set tolerations for their shoots.

> While this works for a few projects, this approach does not scale well. Especially when there is more than one project for a user group. They still need to fulfill the same requirements, so all of their projects need to be restricted to the same geographic location or private seed(s). This would result in additional work for Gardener operators to repeatedly set the same settings to the different projects of the user.

Reviewer: Is it really about one group of users having the exact same requirements, but splitting projects randomly? This seems fairly artificial. (If not, please provide an example.)
However, I can completely buy-in to a scenario where multiple groups have similar requirements. Each group has their own project for separation of concerns, but each of them need to fulfil some legal requirement. This is a scalability issue that makes sense for us to address, but it is not obvious from the text.

In order to enforce something like this, a new resource called [`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding) will be introduced.

Furthermore, [`ProjectGroup`s](#projectgroup) should decrease the work of Gardener operators by letting users group different projects into a single project group, where seed bindings will automatically be shared among them.

### Goals

The overarching goal of this GEP is to lay the foundational work to enable homogeneous sovereign cloud scenarios.

- Enable projects to use some seeds exclusively by using the Taints and Tolerations feature ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding))
- Enhance projects so that shoot control planes can be restricted to a subset of seeds ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding)), e.g. cetrain geographical locations
- Share those, so called, seed bindings to different projects that logically belong together in a concept called [`ProjectGroup`s](#projectgroup)
- Introduce new role for project group administrators, that are allowed to add projects to / remove projects from a project group

### Non-Goals

- Let users exclusively bind seeds to projects on their own

## Proposal

#### ProjectGroup

> A ProjectGroup API will be introduced that abstracts certain information over one or more projects. With this, it will become possible to homogeneously share resources between projects.

Reviewer: As far as I can tell there is no mention of the cardinality of the relationship in the other direction. In other words: How many `ProjectGroup`s. can a `Project` belong to? The main question is whether it could be more than one.

Having an upper bound of one makes it easier to reason about certain things, but it may restrict the approach. Not sure if the additional complexity is necessary/desired.

Anyway, we should clearly state what we want to have in this document.

Such a ProjectGroup manifest looks like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: ProjectGroup
metadata:
  name: group1
spec:
  namespace: gardenprojectgroup-group1

>   owner:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

It will not be possible to add a non-existent project to a project group. This also means that if a project is deleted that is part of a project group, the controller should remove it.

The `.spec.namespace` field in `ProjectGroup` will behave equally as the `Project` `.spec.namespace` field.

##### Permissions

Anybody should be able to create a project group.

However, adding a project to a project group is a sensitive operation.

If anyone could add any project to their project group, a bad actor could add a project of a third party to their project group and restrict them from using any seed except the ones bound in the bad actors project group.

To circumvent a scenario like this, a new role, called `project-group-assigner` will be introduced that allows people with this role to add the project to a project group, in which they have the same role.

#### SeedBinding

To enable the general functionality of the two scenarios described in the [Motivation](#motivation) in a singular concept, `SeedBinding`s shall be introduced.

> Seed bindings will be considered during the scheduling of a shoot, in a way that if a shoot belongs to a project with a seed binding, only seeds that are targeted by the seed binding will be selected for scheduling.

Reviewer: `targeted by the seed binding` does not sound good to me. Maybe we should say that only seeds matching the seed binding label selectors are considered.

---
title: Project Groups
gep-number: 27
creation-date: 2024-02-25
status: implementable
authors:
- "@tobschli"
- "@oliver-goetz"
reviewers:
- "@rfranzke"
- "@ScheererJ"
---

# GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds

## Table of Contents

- [GEP-27: Project Groups to enable Private Seeds](#gep-27-project-groups-to-enable-private-seeds)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
      - [ProjectGroup](#projectgroup)
        - [Permissions](#permissions)
      - [SeedBinding](#seedbinding)
        - [Permissions](#permissions-1)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Implementation without ProjectGroup](#implementation-without-projectgroup)
    - [Resource sharing via hierarchical namespaces](#resource-sharing-via-hierarchical-namespaces)
    - [Exclusively leveraging existing Taints and Tolerations](#exclusively-leveraging-existing-taints-and-tolerations)

## Summary

## Motivation

Currently, all users of Gardener share all available seeds which each other.

> There are users who are bound to legal obligations in regards to geographic location of control planes.

Reviewer: Let's not focus on the users here and describe the use cases instead. Those use cases can be based on compliance, local legal regulations, general segregation of workloads or something else.

> Sometimes it is also required that control planes of users are not allowed to share a seed with other third parties. A seed with those requirements will be called a "private seed".

Reviewer: This is a bit fuzzy.

> At the moment, [such a scenario is enabled](https://gardener.cloud/docs/guides/security-and-compliance/regional-restrictions/) by Gardener operators manually tainting seeds and allowing projects of said users to set tolerations for their shoots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, [such a scenario is enabled](https://gardener.cloud/docs/guides/security-and-compliance/regional-restrictions/) by Gardener operators manually tainting seeds and allowing certain projects to set tolerations for their shoots.
```

> A problem arises when such users want not only one, but multiple projects to be restricted to the same private seed(s). This would result in additional work for the Gardener operators to repeatedly set the same settings to the different projects of the user.

Reviewer: Let's rephrase it to something like "while this works for a few projects this approach does not scale well".

Please also present the showcase later on how the new approach scales better.

The work of Gardener operators should be decreased by this enhancement. There is still some support required by them, because it should not be allowed for any arbitrary user to "reserve" a seed by themselves. It shall still be the decision of Gardener operators to decide if a user is allowed to have such a private seed.

To summarize, there are two scenarios which need to be systematically enabled:

1. Enable the assured scheduling of shoot control planes to specific geographical regions

> 2. Let users have the opportunity to have a "private seed" (enabled by Gardener operators)

Reviewer: What is the difference between these two scenarios? I see only one scenario, i.e. assured scheduling of shoot control planes to a specific subset of seeds defined by some label conditions.

Author: The difference is that in the second use case, additionally to the requirement that the control plane is on a seed in a specific region, no other shoot control planes of a third user group is allowed on this seed.

Both scenarios are currently already technically possible, but require strong involvement of Gardener operators.

> Also users can easily ignore those restrictions, by simply setting the `.spec.seedSelector` of a shoot to match a seed without the taint / outside the required geographical location.

Reviewer: What are the boundary conditions of this proposal? Do we want to help cluster owners in a cooperative environment basically preventing them from accidentally performing errors or do we want to ensure the defined order in a malicious environment where cluster owners try everything they can to work against the rules?

Author: The first boundary conditions that you mention should be the target of this GEP. By the new approach, cluster owners should not accidentally break local law by specifying the `Shoot.spec.seedSelector` field.

Reviewer: In that case please also add this to the document.

In order to enforce something like this, a new resource called [`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding) will be introduced.

Furthermore, [`ProjectGroup`s](#projectgroup) should decrease the work of Gardener operators by letting users group different projects into a single project group, where seed bindings will automatically be shared among them.

### Goals

The overarching goal of this GEP is to lay the foundational work to enable homogeneous sovereign cloud scenarios.

- Enable projects to use some seeds exclusively by using the Taints and Tolerations feature ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding))

> - Enhance projects so that shoot control planes can be restricted to certain geographical regions ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enhance projects so that shoot control planes can be restricted to a subset of seeds ([`SeedBinding`s](#seedbinding)), e.g. certain geographical regions 
```

- Share those, so called, seed bindings to different projects that logically belong together in a concept called [`ProjectGroup`s](#projectgroup)

> - Introduce new role for project group administrators, that are allowed to add projects to a project group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce new role for project group administrators, that are allowed to add projects to/remove projects from a project group
```

### Non-Goals

> - Let users exclusively bind seeds on their own

Reviewer: Please add shoot clusters to the sentence. What does "bind seeds" even mean?

Reviewer: Even with the new wording I still struggle. From what I understand the non-goal is to allow users to reserve a random seed for themselves. Maybe we should word it like this.

## Proposal

#### ProjectGroup

A ProjectGroup API will be introduced that abstracts certain information over one or more projects. With this, it will become possible to homogeneously share resources between projects.

Such a ProjectGroup manifest looks like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: ProjectGroup
metadata:
  name: group1
spec:
  namespace: gardenprojectgroup-group1
  owner:
    apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
    kind: User

>     name: john.doe@example.com

Reviewer: Is it really only one owner or could it be multiple?

Reviewer: The `Project` resource has the following comment in the code:

```
// TODO: Remove this field in favor of the `owner` role in `v1`.
```

Do we really want to introduce this technical debt here or should we already start with the proper approach?

  members:
  - apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
    kind: User
    name: alice.doe@example.com
    role: admin

>   projects:
>     - Project1
>     - Project2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  projects:
  - Project1
  - Project2
```

```

The main idea behind `ProjectGroup`s is that they, like projects, have their own namespace.
Every resource that is shareable (at first only `SeedBinding`s) in this namespace, will be shared to all projects in this project group.

This sharing mechanism will be achieved by the `ProjectGroup` controller.
It will copy the objects from the project group namespace to the namespaces of the projects that belong to the project group.

> When the object in the project group namespace is changed, the controller will immediately update the objects in the namespaces of the projects.

Reviewer: Should the controller also prevent changes in the target namespace, e.g. a project member changing the copied `SeedBinding` resource? Should this all be implemented in the controller or should we use `ManagedResource`s?

Author: Yes, the controller should prevent users from changing the object in the target namespace.
I am unsure how we could leverage `ManagedResource`s for this. Could you elaborate on this?

Reviewer: You could simply create a [`ManagedResource`](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/resource-manager.md#managedresource-controller) for the copy targets. Then `gardener-resource-manager` will take care of creating the corresponding resources and keep them in the target state. It is obviously also possible to do this manually with another controller, but it means more or less reinventing the wheel if you want to apply some resource and keep it in the target state.

To let a user in a project know that such an object is being kept in sync with an object in a project group, a `projectgroup.gardener.cloud/copied-from: <projectgroup-name>` label will be added to it.

> This copying feature can become useful for future use cases, for example for sharing infrastructure credentials across different projects, by copying `SecretBinding`s.

Reviewer: Is the `SecretBinding` a good example? It already supports cross-namespace references to the actual infrastructure secret, all without copying.

Reviewer 2: Sounds reasonable to me. The secret remains in the project group, but the secretBinding is copied to all projects attached to the project group. 
This way all projects would be able to use the secret for shoots etc., but the project members won't need access to the secret data.

Reviewer: Ok, looking at it from this perspective indeed makes sense. Maybe, it helps in the understanding to change sentence a bit:

```suggestion
This copying feature can become useful for future use cases, for example for sharing infrastructure credentials across different projects (without providing direct access to project members), by copying `SecretBinding`s.
```

> It will not be possible to add non-existent project to a project group. This also means that if a project is deleted that is part of a project group, the controller should remove it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will not be possible to add a non-existent project to a project group. This also means that if a project is deleted that is part of a project group, the controller should remove it.
```

The `.spec.namespace` field in `ProjectGroup` will behave equally as the `Project` `.spec.namespace` field.

##### Permissions

Anybody should be able to create a project group.

> But adding a project to a project group is a sensitive operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, adding a project to a project group is a sensitive operation.
```

If anyone could add any project to their project group, a bad actor could add a project of a third party to their project group and restrict them from using any seed except the ones bound in the bad actors project group.

To circumvent a scenario like this, a new role, called `project-group-assigner` will be introduced that allows people with this role to add the project to a project group, in which they have the same role.

> #### SeedBinding

Reviewer: What should happen to existing shoot clusters when a `SeedBinding` is created in a project? For example, what happens to shoot clusters not conforming to the `SeedBinding`.

What should happen if a `SeedBinding` changes invalidating the existing shoot scheduling decisions?

Author: > What should happen to existing shoot clusters when a `SeedBinding` is created in a project? For example, what happens to shoot clusters not conforming to the `SeedBinding`.

Regarding your comment on control plane migration, I think this should be the solution to the problems that you are mentioning here.

> What should happen if a `SeedBinding` changes invalidating the existing shoot scheduling decisions?

What do you mean by invalidating existing shoot scheduling decisions?

Reviewer: > Regarding your comment on control plane migration, I think this should be the solution to the problems that you are mentioning here.

As of now, control plane migration implies a downtime of the control plane. (Duration depends on infrastructure and some boundary conditions, e.g. `etcd` size.)

I ask because I am hesitant to use control plane migration as an automatic solution here. Furthermore, I would like to see the boundary conditions mentioned explicitly. In other words:
- If we think that creating a seed binding will automatically trigger a control plane migration it should be noted in the document.
- If updates to seed binding should not be possible if the invalidate a shoot scheduling decision it needs to be mentioned.
- If we only apply the seed binding during scheduling/control plane migration, but ignore it at all other times we should at least note that it is possible that the decision where to schedule a control plane to might change over time due to updates to the seed binding and someone else needs to take care of cleaning that up.

> What do you mean by invalidating existing shoot scheduling decisions?

If I have seeds `A` and `B`, create a seed binding in my project matching seed `A` and create a shoot it will be scheduled to seed `A`. However, if I now realise my seed binding is wrong and change it to match `B` instead the previous scheduling decision concerning my shoot cluster is invalid. What should happen in that case?

To enable the general functionality of the two scenarios described in the [Motivation](#motivation) in a singular concept, `SeedBinding`s shall be introduced.

> Seed bindings will be considered during the scheduling of a shoot, in a way that if a shoot belongs to a project with a seed binding, only seeds that are targeted by the seed binding will be selected for scheduling.

Reviewer: What about control plane migration?

Author: I think it would be a good idea to do control plane migration when a project gets bound to a seed.
Although, I am unsure about all of the side effects that a control plane migration would entail.

Reviewer: I was rather getting at that seed bindings should also be considered when performing a control plane migration. In other words: They are not only relevant in shoot scheduling, but also in control plane migration. This should also be noted in the document.

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: SeedBinding
metadata:
  name: privateseed-provider-1
  namespace: garden-project1
taintSeed: false
seedSelector:
  matchLabels:
    foo: bar

```

> If `.taintSeed` is set to `true`, the specified seed(s) will be tainted, so that no other projects outside the project group can schedule shoots on them.

Reviewer: What will the taint be? Will the shoot specifications in the project(s) get corresponding tolerations?

Reviewer 2: There is a risk that someone accidentally creates taints for public seeds with such a feature.
Additionally, our seed specs are static at the moment. This feature would change that and so the way we define seeds in our landscapes.
Defining which seed is private and which is public should be part of the landscape definition, but not based on an object in a project or project group.
Thus, I would not implement this feature.

Author: An alternative would be to specify an optional toleration to the `SeedBinding` resource. When this is is set, the project will receive the toleration in `.spec.tolerations.[]whitelist` and `.spec.tolerations.[]defaults`.

With this approach, Gardener operators would need to manually set the tolerations to the seeds that should become private and then create the `SeedBinding` with the correlating toleration field.

This would enhance the work of Gardener operators, but decreases accidental mistakes.

I think this approach is also fine, especially when looking at the problems that automatic tainting could produce.
What do you think of this half-automatic approach?

Reviewer 3: Is this feature very useful?

W/o "automatic" tainting, operators need to taint the seeds individually but on the other hand, they already need to put proper labels on the seeds, so that they are selectable, right?

> Projects that have such a tainting binding will receive the `.spec.tolerations.[]whitelist` and `.spec.tolerations.[]defaults` counterpart toleration by the seed binding controller.

Reviewer: Not sure "tainting binding" is a thing. It sounds weird to me, but I am no native speaker.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused by this term, too.

Can you make an example with SeedBinding and Project + Tolerations and how the seed will look like?

> The name of the taint will be derived from its `.metadata.name`. With that, there will be no conflict when the seed binding gets shared to other namespaces.

Reviewer: Should the taint name not be globally unique, i.e. does it need the namespace as well?

> What this also means is that the names of seed bindings need to be globally unique.

Reviewer: Is that the precondition or based on the fact that we needs a unique identification of the taints?

> If a tainting binding is created for a seed that already has a taint, an error will be returned.

Reviewer: Why? A seed could have more than one taint.

> Seed bindings will only work in project namespaces.

Reviewer: What about project group namespaces? I thought they could also serve a purpose there, i.e. being the source of other seed bindings.

Author: In project group namespaces they just have the effect of being replicated into the project namespaces. Therefore they are just like any arbitrary object in this namespace, but when it will be replicated to the project namespaces by the `ProjectGroup` controller, they take effect by adapting the scheduling of shoots in that project.

Reviewer: Ok, so you are basically saying with this sentence that seed bindings will only ever be considered/take effect for shoot clusters in the same namespace for scheduling and (hopefully) control plane migration. Right?

If yes, at least I would propose to be more explicit about it.

> The field `.seedSelector` determines which seeds shall be schedulable. A selecting mechanism, like the one in `Shoot.spec.seedSelector` will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The field `.seedSelector` determines which seeds shall be selected. This is analogous to `Shoot.spec.seedSelector`.
```
